# Instructions for reproducibility

Each step of the analysis can be performed independently, though runtimes vary between minutes and weeks. Data generate in each step is either checked into version control and available with the repository (specifically, convergence and posterior statistics and the examined age-depth models) or can be downloaded from an archive (trace files, MAP trees, and raw stratigraphic data).

## Required software

TODO: check exact versions
* bash
* revBayes as `rb`
* R version 4.5.3
* RStudio
* Julia

## 1. Generating stratigraphic architectures

**Data required:** None  
**Data produced:** 
* raw data under `data/strat/` (saved online)
* figures of stratigraphic architectures under `figs/`
* age-depth models stored as `.csv` under `data/strat/selected_adms.csv` (checked into version control)
**Approximate runtime:** decaminutes

Start julia via

```bash
julia --project=. -i -e "using Pkg; Pkg.instantiate()"
```

This immediately activates the project and installs & precompiles all requried packages. Then run

```Julia
include("code/strat_architectures/miller_2020_run.jl")
include("code/strat_architectures/sinusoid_run.jl")
```

to simulate both attached carbonate platforms. This generated data in `data/strat/`, including the raw `.h5` files and `.csv` files of important output.

You can then produce the stratigraphic figures via 

```Julia
include("code/strat_architectures/make_plots.jl")
```

To process the data and use it for further steps, open the file `phylostrat.Rproj` in RStudio, and then execute
```R
source("code/strat_architectures/strat_analysis.R")
```

in the console. This exports data on the examined age-depth models as .csv for further use in R.

## 2. Running phylogenetic simulations and inference

Here, `scen = fbd_base|fbd_strat|fbd_gap_est|fbd_gap_prior`. Relation to the paper is as follows:
* `fbd_base` = cFBD + CFS
* `fbd_strat` = cFBD + MSG and cFBD + FLG
* `fbd_gap_est` = sFBDw + FLG
* `fbg_gap_prior` = sFBDs + FLG

**Data required**: age-depth models stored as `.csv` under `data/strat/selected_adms.csv` (available in version control or freshly generated from 1.)  
**Data generated**: simulation data and trace files under `data/[scen]`. Can alternatively be downloaded (see 5.)  
**Approximate runtime:** Weeks

Assuming you have a conda environment with snakemake installed as described [here](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html).

```bash
conda activate snakemake
snakemake --snakefile --snakefile_[case] --cores YOUR_CORES
```

Feel free to add snakemake options to this, e.g., `--keep-going` or others. This will run a few days to weeks depending on your setup.

## 3. Generating MAP trees

**Data needed:** trace files for the different analyses under `data/` (can be downloaded, see below)  
**Data generated:** MAP trees under `data/` (these can be downloaded, see below)  
**Approximate runtime:** hours

```bash
conda activate snakemake
snakemake --snakefile --snakefile_tree_summary --cores 1 --keep-going
```

You can run this on more cores if you like, but it is RAM limited. This will take a few hours to run.

## 4. Convergence and posterior analysis

**Data needed:** trace files and MAP trees from the different analyses under `data/` (can be downloaded, see below)  
**Data generated:** `data/post_values.RData` and `data/convergence_assessment.RData`, containing convergence metrics and posterior statistics (checked into version control and provided with the repo)  
**Approximate runtime:** hours

Open the file `phylostrat.Rproj` in RStudio, and run
```R
source("code/convergence_assessment.R")
source("get_post_vals.R")
```

This runs a bit as it has to load all trace files under `data/`.

## 5. Generating summary plots of phylogenetic analyses and age-depth models

**Data required:** `data/strat/selected_adms.csv`, `data/post_values.RData`, and `data/convergence_assessment.RData`(all provided with the repo and checked into version control, or freshly generated by the above steps)  
**Data generated:** Summary figures on phylogenetic inference and age-depth models under `figs/`  
**Approx. runtime:** Minutes

Open the file `phylostrat.Rproj` in RStudio, and run
```R
source("code/make_figs.R")
```

in the console to generate the figures.

## 6. Downloading data

**Data required:** None  
**Data generated:** trace files and stratigraphic architectures under `data/`  
**Approx. runtime:** decaminutes (depending on your internet speed)  

TBA, this depends on data being archived on YoDA